Chapter OneELECTRIC CHARGESAND FIELDS1.1 INTRODUCTIONAll of us have the experience of seeing a spark or hearing a crackle whenwe take off our synthetic clothes or sweater, particularly in dry weather.This is almost inevitable with ladies garments like a polyester saree. Haveyou ever tried to find any explanation for this phenomenon? Anothercommon example of electric discharge is the lightning that we see in thesky during thunderstorms. We also experience a sensation of an electricshock either while opening the door of a car or holding the iron bar of abus after sliding from our seat. The reason for these experiences isdischarge of electric charges through our body, which were accumulateddue to rubbing of insulating surfaces. You might have also heard thatthis is due to generation of static electricity. This is precisely the topic weare going to discuss in this and the next chapter. Static means anythingthat does not move or change with time. Electrostatics deals with thestudy of forces, fields and potentials arising from static charges.1.2 ELECTRIC CHARGEHistorically the credit of discovery of the fact that amber rubbed withwool or silk cloth attracts light objects goes to Thales of Miletus, Greece,around 600 BC. The name electricity is coined from the Greek wordelektron meaning amber. Many such pairs of materials were known whichPhysicshttp://ephysics.physics.ucla.edu/travoltage/HTML/Interactive animation on simple electrostatic experiments:on rubbing could attract light objectslike straw, pith balls and bits of papers.You can perform the following activityat home to experience such an effect.Cut out long thin strips of white paperand lightly iron them. Take them near aTV screen or computer monitor. You willsee that the strips get attracted to thescreen. In fact they remain stuck to thescreen for a while.It was observed that if two glass rodsrubbed with wool or silk cloth arebrought close to each other, they repeleach other [Fig. 1.1(a)]. The two strandsFIGURE 1.1 Rods and pith balls: like charges repel andof wool or two pieces of silk cloth, withunlike charges attract each other.which the rods were rubbed, also repeleach other. However, the glass rod andwool attracted each other. Similarly, two plastic rods rubbed with catsfur repelled each other [Fig. 1.1(b)] but attracted the fur. On the otherhand, the plastic rod attracts the glass rod [Fig. 1.1(c)] and repel the silkor wool with which the glass rod is rubbed. The glass rod repels the fur.If a plastic rod rubbed with fur is made to touch two small pith balls(now-a-days we can use polystyrene balls) suspended by silk or nylonthread, then the balls repel each other [Fig. 1.1(d)] and are also repelledby the rod. A similar effect is found if the pith balls are touched with aglass rod rubbed with silk [Fig. 1.1(e)]. A dramatic observation is that apith ball touched with glass rod attracts another pith ball touched withplastic rod [Fig. 1.1(f )].These seemingly simple facts were established from years of effortsand careful experiments and their analyses. It was concluded, after manycareful studies by different scientists, that there were only two kinds ofan entity which is called the electric charge. We say that the bodies likeglass or plastic rods, silk, fur and pith balls are electrified. They acquirean electric charge on rubbing. The experiments on pith balls suggestedthat there are two kinds of electrification and we find that (i) like chargesrepel and (ii) unlike charges attract each other. The experiments alsodemonstrated that the charges are transferred from the rods to the pithballs on contact. It is said that the pith balls are electrified or are chargedby contact. The property which differentiates the two kinds of charges iscalled the polarity of charge.When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, the rod acquires one kind ofcharge and the silk acquires the second kind of charge. This is true forany pair of objects that are rubbed to be electrified. Now if the electrifiedglass rod is brought in contact with silk, with which it was rubbed, theyno longer attract each other. They also do not attract or repel other lightobjects as they did on being electrified.Thus, the charges acquired after rubbing are lost when the chargedbodies are brought in contact. What can you conclude from these2observations? It just tells us that unlike charges acquired by the objectsElectric Chargesand Fieldsneutralise or nullify each others effect. Therefore the charges were namedas positive and negative by the American scientist Benjamin Franklin.We know that when we add a positive number to a negative number ofthe same magnitude, the sum is zero. This might have been thephilosophy in naming the charges as positive and negative. By convention,the charge on glass rod or cats fur is called positive and that on plasticrod or silk is termed negative. If an object possesses an electric charge, itis said to be electrified or charged. When it has no charge it is said to beneutral.UNIFICATIONOF ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISMIn olden days, electricity and magnetism were treated as separate subjects. Electricitydealt with charges on glass rods, cats fur, batteries, lightning, etc., while magnetismdescribed interactions of magnets, iron filings, compass needles, etc. In 1820 Danishscientist Oersted found that a compass needle is deflected by passing an electric currentthrough a wire placed near the needle. Ampere and Faraday supported this observationby saying that electric charges in motion produce magnetic fields and moving magnetsgenerate electricity. The unification was achieved when the Scottish physicist Maxwelland the Dutch physicist Lorentz put forward a theory where they showed theinterdependence of these two subjects. This field is called electromagnetism. Most of thephenomena occurring around us can be described under electromagnetism. Virtuallyevery force that we can think of like friction, chemical force between atoms holding thematter together, and even the forces describing processes occurring in cells of livingorganisms, have its origin in electromagnetic force. Electromagnetic force is one of thefundamental forces of nature.Maxwell put forth four equations that play the same role in classical electromagnetismas Newtons equations of motion and gravitation law play in mechanics. He also arguedthat light is electromagnetic in nature and its speed can be found by making purelyelectric and magnetic measurements. He claimed that the science of optics is intimatelyrelated to that of electricity and magnetism.The science of electricity and magnetism is the foundation for the modern technologicalcivilisation. Electric power, telecommunication, radio and television, and a wide varietyof the practical appliances used in daily life are based on the principles of this science.Although charged particles in motion exert both electric and magnetic forces, in theframe of reference where all the charges are at rest, the forces are purely electrical. Youknow that gravitational force is a long-range force. Its effect is felt even when the distancebetween the interacting particles is very large because the force decreases inversely asthe square of the distance between the interacting bodies. We will learn in this chapterthat electric force is also as pervasive and is in fact stronger than the gravitational forceby several orders of magnitude (refer to Chapter 1 of Class XI Physics Textbook).A simple apparatus to detect charge on a body is the gold-leafelectroscope [Fig. 1.2(a)]. It consists of a vertical metal rod housed in abox, with two thin gold leaves attached to its bottom end. When a chargedobject touches the metal knob at the top of the rod, charge flows on tothe leaves and they diverge. The degree of divergance is an indicator ofthe amount of charge.3PhysicsStudents can make a simple electroscope asfollows [Fig. 1.2(b)]: Take a thin aluminium curtainrod with ball ends fitted for hanging the curtain. Cutout a piece of length about 20 cm with the ball atone end and flatten the cut end. Take a large bottlethat can hold this rod and a cork which will fit in theopening of the bottle. Make a hole in the corksufficient to hold the curtain rod snugly. Slide therod through the hole in the cork with the cut end onthe lower side and ball end projecting above the cork.Fold a small, thin aluminium foil (about 6 cm inlength) in the middle and attach it to the flattenedend of the rod by cellulose tape. This forms the leavesof your electroscope. Fit the cork in the bottle withabout 5 cm of the ball end projecting above the cork.A paper scale may be put inside the bottle in advanceto measure the separation of leaves. The separationis a rough measure of the amount of charge on theelectroscope.To understand how the electroscope works, usethe white paper strips we used for seeing theattraction of charged bodies. Fold the strips into halfso that you make a mark of fold. Open the strip andFIGURE 1.2 Electroscopes: (a) The gold leafiron it lightly with the mountain fold up, as shownelectroscope, (b) Schematics of a simplein Fig. 1.3. Hold the strip by pinching it at the fold.electroscope.You would notice that the two halves move apart.This shows that the strip has acquired charge on ironing. When you foldit into half, both the halves have the same charge. Hence they repel eachother. The same effect is seen in the leaf electroscope. On charging thecurtain rod by touching the ball end with an electrified body, charge istransferred to the curtain rod and the attached aluminium foil. Both thehalves of the foil get similar charge and therefore repel each other. Thedivergence in the leaves depends on the amount of charge on them. Letus first try to understand why material bodies acquire charge.You know that all matter is made up of atoms and/or molecules.Although normally the materials are electrically neutral, they do containcharges; but their charges are exactly balanced. Forces that hold themolecules together, forces that hold atoms together in a solid, the adhesiveforce of glue, forces associated with surface tension, all are basicallyelectrical in nature, arising from the forces between charged particles.Thus the electric force is all pervasive and it encompasses almost eachand every field associated with our life. It is therefore essential that welearn more about such a force.To electrify a neutral body, we need to add or remove one kind ofFIGURE 1.3 Paper strip charge. When we say that a body is charged, we always refer to thisexperiment.excess charge or deficit of charge. In solids, some of the electrons, beingless tightly bound in the atom, are the charges which are transferredfrom one body to the other. A body can thus be charged positively by4losing some of its electrons. Similarly, a body can be charged negativelyElectric Chargesand Fieldsby gaining electrons. When we rub a glass rod with silk, some of theelectrons from the rod are transferred to the silk cloth. Thus the rod getspositively charged and the silk gets negatively charged. No new charge iscreated in the process of rubbing. Also the number of electrons, that aretransferred, is a very small fraction of the total number of electrons in thematerial body. Also only the less tightly bound electrons in a materialbody can be transferred from it to another by rubbing. Therefore, whena body is rubbed with another, the bodies get charged and that is whywe have to stick to certain pairs of materials to notice charging on rubbingthe bodies.1.3 CONDUCTORSANDINSULATORSA metal rod held in hand and rubbed with wool will not show any sign ofbeing charged. However, if a metal rod with a wooden or plastic handle isrubbed without touching its metal part, it shows signs of charging.Suppose we connect one end of a copper wire to a neutral pith ball andthe other end to a negatively charged plastic rod. We will find that thepith ball acquires a negative charge. If a similar experiment is repeatedwith a nylon thread or a rubber band, no transfer of charge will takeplace from the plastic rod to the pith ball. Why does the transfer of chargenot take place from the rod to the ball?Some substances readily allow passage of electricity through them,others do not. Those which allow electricity to pass through them easilyare called conductors. They have electric charges (electrons) that arecomparatively free to move inside the material. Metals, human and animalbodies and earth are conductors. Most of the non-metals like glass,porcelain, plastic, nylon, wood offer high resistance to the passage ofelectricity through them. They are called insulators. Most substancesfall into one of the two classes stated above*.When some charge is transferred to a conductor, it readily getsdistributed over the entire surface of the conductor. In contrast, if somecharge is put on an insulator, it stays at the same place. You will learnwhy this happens in the next chapter.This property of the materials tells you why a nylon or plastic combgets electrified on combing dry hair or on rubbing, but a metal articlelike spoon does not. The charges on metal leak through our body to theground as both are conductors of electricity.When we bring a charged body in contact with the earth, all theexcess charge on the body disappears by causing a momentary currentto pass to the ground through the connecting conductor (such as ourbody). This process of sharing the charges with the earth is calledgrounding or earthing. Earthing provides a safety measure for electricalcircuits and appliances. A thick metal plate is buried deep into the earthand thick wires are drawn from this plate; these are used in buildingsfor the purpose of earthing near the mains supply. The electric wiring inour houses has three wires: live, neutral and earth. The first two carry* There is a third category called semiconductors, which offer resistance to themovement of charges which is intermediate between the conductors andinsulators.5Physicselectric current from the power station and the third is earthed byconnecting it to the buried metal plate. Metallic bodies of the electricappliances such as electric iron, refrigerator, TV are connected to theearth wire. When any fault occurs or live wire touches the metallic body,the charge flows to the earth without damaging the appliance and withoutcausing any injury to the humans; this would have otherwise beenunavoidable since the human body is a conductor of electricity.1.4 CHARGINGFIGURE 1.4 Chargingby induction.6BYINDUCTIONWhen we touch a pith ball with an electrified plastic rod, some of thenegative charges on the rod are transferred to the pith ball and it alsogets charged. Thus the pith ball is charged by contact. It is then repelledby the plastic rod but is attracted by a glass rod which is oppositelycharged. However, why a electrified rod attracts light objects, is a questionwe have still left unanswered. Let us try to understand what could behappening by performing the following experiment.(i) Bring two metal spheres, A and B, supported on insulating stands,in contact as shown in Fig. 1.4(a).(ii) Bring a positively charged rod near one of the spheres, say A, takingcare that it does not touch the sphere. The free electrons in the spheresare attracted towards the rod. This leaves an excess of positive chargeon the rear surface of sphere B. Both kinds of charges are bound inthe metal spheres and cannot escape. They, therefore, reside on thesurfaces, as shown in Fig. 1.4(b). The left surface of sphere A, has anexcess of negative charge and the right surface of sphere B, has anexcess of positive charge. However, not all of the electrons in the sphereshave accumulated on the left surface of A. As the negative chargestarts building up at the left surface of A, other electrons are repelledby these. In a short time, equilibrium is reached under the action offorce of attraction of the rod and the force of repulsion due to theaccumulated charges. Fig. 1.4(b) shows the equilibrium situation.The process is called induction of charge and happens almostinstantly. The accumulated charges remain on the surface, as shown,till the glass rod is held near the sphere. If the rod is removed, thecharges are not acted by any outside force and they redistribute totheir original neutral state.(iii) Separate the spheres by a small distance while the glass rod is stillheld near sphere A, as shown in Fig. 1.4(c). The two spheres are foundto be oppositely charged and attract each other.(iv) Remove the rod. The charges on spheres rearrange themselves asshown in Fig. 1.4(d). Now, separate the spheres quite apart. Thecharges on them get uniformly distributed over them, as shown inFig. 1.4(e).In this process, the metal spheres will each be equal and oppositelycharged. This is charging by induction. The positively charged glass roddoes not lose any of its charge, contrary to the process of charging bycontact.When electrified rods are brought near light objects, a similar effecttakes place. The rods induce opposite charges on the near surfaces ofthe objects and similar charges move to the farther side of the object.Electric Chargesand Fields[This happens even when the light object is not a conductor. Themechanism for how this happens is explained later in Sections 1.10 and2.10.] The centres of the two types of charges are slightly separated. Weknow that opposite charges attract while similar charges repel. However,the magnitude of force depends on the distance between the chargesand in this case the force of attraction overweighs the force of repulsion.As a result the particles like bits of paper or pith balls, being light, arepulled towards the rods.Example 1.1 How can you charge a metal sphere positively withouttouching it?Interactive animation on charging a two-sphere system by induction:http://www.physicsclassroom.com/mmedia/estatics/estaticTOC.htmlSolution Figure 1.5(a) shows an uncharged metallic sphere on aninsulating metal stand. Bring a negatively charged rod close to themetallic sphere, as shown in Fig. 1.5(b). As the rod is brought closeto the sphere, the free electrons in the sphere move away due torepulsion and start piling up at the farther end. The near end becomespositively charged due to deficit of electrons. This process of chargedistribution stops when the net force on the free electrons inside themetal is zero. Connect the sphere to the ground by a conductingwire. The electrons will flow to the ground while the positive chargesat the near end will remain held there due to the attractive force ofthe negative charges on the rod, as shown in Fig. 1.5(c). Disconnectthe sphere from the ground. The positive charge continues to beheld at the near end [Fig. 1.5(d)]. Remove the electrified rod. Thepositive charge will spread uniformly over the sphere as shown inFig. 1.5(e).FIGURE 1.5EXAMPLE 1.1In this experiment, the metal sphere gets charged by the processof induction and the rod does not lose any of its charge.Similar steps are involved in charging a metal sphere negativelyby induction, by bringing a positively charged rod near it. In thiscase the electrons will flow from the ground to the sphere when thesphere is connected to the ground with a wire. Can you explain why?7Physics1.5 BASIC PROPERTIESOFELECTRIC CHARGEWe have seen that there are two types of charges, namely positive andnegative and their effects tend to cancel each other. Here, we shall nowdescribe some other properties of the electric charge.If the sizes of charged bodies are very small as compared to thedistances between them, we treat them as point charges. All thecharge content of the body is assumed to be concentrated at one pointin space.1.5.1 Additivity of chargesWe have not as yet given a quantitative definition of a charge; we shallfollow it up in the next section. We shall tentatively assume that this canbe done and proceed. If a system contains two point charges q1 and q2,the total charge of the system is obtained simply by adding algebraicallyq1 and q2 , i.e., charges add up like real numbers or they are scalars likethe mass of a body. If a system contains n charges q1, q2, q3, , qn, thenthe total charge of the system is q1 + q2 + q3 +  + qn . Charge hasmagnitude but no direction, similar to the mass. However, there is onedifference between mass and charge. Mass of a body is always positivewhereas a charge can be either positive or negative. Proper signs have tobe used while adding the charges in a system. For example, thetotal charge of a system containing five charges +1, +2, 3, +4 and 5,in some arbitrary unit, is (+1) + (+2) + (3) + (+4) + (5) = 1 in thesame unit.1.5.2 Charge is conservedWe have already hinted to the fact that when bodies are charged byrubbing, there is transfer of electrons from one body to the other; no newcharges are either created or destroyed. A picture of particles of electriccharge enables us to understand the idea of conservation of charge. Whenwe rub two bodies, what one body gains in charge the other body loses.Within an isolated system consisting of many charged bodies, due tointeractions among the bodies, charges may get redistributed but it isfound that the total charge of the isolated system is always conserved.Conservation of charge has been established experimentally.It is not possible to create or destroy net charge carried by any isolatedsystem although the charge carrying particles may be created or destroyedin a process. Sometimes nature creates charged particles: a neutron turnsinto a proton and an electron. The proton and electron thus created haveequal and opposite charges and the total charge is zero before and afterthe creation.1.5.3 Quantisation of chargeExperimentally it is established that all free charges are integral multiplesof a basic unit of charge denoted by e. Thus charge q on a body is alwaysgiven by8q = neElectric Chargesand Fieldswhere n is any integer, positive or negative. This basic unit of charge isthe charge that an electron or proton carries. By convention, the chargeon an electron is taken to be negative; therefore charge on an electron iswritten as e and that on a proton as +e.The fact that electric charge is always an integral multiple of e is termedas quantisation of charge. There are a large number of situations in physicswhere certain physical quantities are quantised. The quantisation of chargewas first suggested by the experimental laws of electrolysis discovered byEnglish experimentalist Faraday. It was experimentally demonstrated byMillikan in 1912.In the International System (SI) of Units, a unit of charge is called acoulomb and is denoted by the symbol C. A coulomb is defined in termsthe unit of the electric current which you are going to learn in asubsequent chapter. In terms of this definition, one coulomb is the chargeflowing through a wire in 1 s if the current is 1 A (ampere), (see Chapter 2of Class XI, Physics Textbook , Part I). In this system, the value of thebasic unit of charge ise = 1.602192  1019 CThus, there are about 6  1018 electrons in a charge of 1C. Inelectrostatics, charges of this large magnitude are seldom encounteredand hence we use smaller units 1 C (micro coulomb) = 106 C or 1 mC(milli coulomb) = 103 C.If the protons and electrons are the only basic charges in the universe,all the observable charges have to be integral multiples of e. Thus, if abody contains n1 electrons and n 2 protons, the total amount of chargeon the body is n 2  e + n1  (e) = (n 2  n1) e. Since n1 and n2 are integers,their difference is also an integer. Thus the charge on any body is alwaysan integral multiple of e and can be increased or decreased also in stepsof e.The step size e is, however, very small because at the macroscopiclevel, we deal with charges of a few C. At this scale the fact that charge ofa body can increase or decrease in units of e is not visible. The grainynature of the charge is lost and it appears to be continuous.This situation can be compared with the geometrical concepts of pointsand lines. A dotted line viewed from a distance appears continuous tous but is not continuous in reality. As many points very close toeach other normally give an impression of a continuous line, manysmall charges taken together appear as a continuous chargedistribution.At the macroscopic level, one deals with charges that are enormouscompared to the magnitude of charge e. Since e = 1.6  1019 C, a chargeof magnitude, say 1 C, contains something like 1013 times the electroniccharge. At this scale, the fact that charge can increase or decrease only inunits of e is not very different from saying that charge can take continuousvalues. Thus, at the macroscopic level, the quantisation of charge has nopractical consequence and can be ignored. At the microscopic level, wherethe charges involved are of the order of a few tens or hundreds of e, i.e.,9Physicsthey can be counted, they appear in discrete lumps and quantisation ofcharge cannot be ignored. It is the scale involved that is very important.EXAMPLE 1.2Example 1.2 If 109 electrons move out of a body to another bodyevery second, how much time is required to get a total charge of 1 Con the other body?Solution In one second 109 electrons move out of the body. Thereforethe charge given out in one second is 1.6  1019  109 C = 1.6  1010 C.The time required to accumulate a charge of 1 C can then be estimatedto be 1 C  (1.6  1010 C/s) = 6.25  109 s = 6.25  109  (365  24 3600) years = 198 years. Thus to collect a charge of one coulomb,from a body from which 109 electrons move out every second, we willneed approximately 200 years. One coulomb is, therefore, a very largeunit for many practical purposes.It is, however, also important to know what is roughly the number ofelectrons contained in a piece of one cubic centimetre of a material.A cubic piece of copper of side 1 cm contains about 2.5  10 24electrons.EXAMPLE 1.3Example 1.3 How much positive and negative charge is there in acup of water?Solution Let us assume that the mass of one cup of water is250 g. The molecular mass of water is 18g. Thus, one mole(= 6.02  1023 molecules) of water is 18 g. Therefore the number ofmolecules in one cup of water is (250/18)  6.02  1023.Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygenatom, i.e., 10 electrons and 10 protons. Hence the total positive andtotal negative charge has the same magnitude. It is equal to(250/18)  6.02  1023  10  1.6  1019 C = 1.34  107 C.1.6 COULOMBS LAWCoulombs law is a quantitative statement about the force between twopoint charges. When the linear size of charged bodies are much smallerthan the distance separating them, the size may be ignored and thecharged bodies are treated as point charges. Coulomb measured theforce between two point charges and found that it varied inversely asthe square of the distance between the charges and was directlyproportional to the product of the magnitude of the two charges andacted along the line joining the two charges. Thus, if two point chargesq1, q2 are separated by a distance r in vacuum, the magnitude of theforce (F) between them is given byF =kq1 q 2(1.1)r2How did Coulomb arrive at this law from his experiments? Coulombused a torsion balance* for measuring the force between two charged metallic10* A torsion balance is a sensitive device to measure force. It was also used laterby Cavendish to measure the very feeble gravitational force between two objects,to verify Newtons Law of Gravitation.Electric Chargesand FieldsCHARLES AUGUSTIN DE COULOMB (1736 1806)spheres. When the separation between two spheres is muchlarger than the radius of each sphere, the charged spheresmay be regarded as point charges. However, the chargeson the spheres were unknown, to begin with. How thencould he discover a relation like Eq. (1.1)? Coulombthought of the following simple way: Suppose the chargeon a metallic sphere is q. If the sphere is put in contactwith an identical uncharged sphere, the charge will spreadover the two spheres. By symmetry, the charge on eachsphere will be q/2*. Repeating this process, we can getcharges q/2, q/4, etc. Coulomb varied the distance for afixed pair of charges and measured the force for differentseparations. He then varied the charges in pairs, keepingCharles Augustin dethe distance fixed for each pair. Comparing forces forCoulomb (1736  1806)different pairs of charges at different distances, CoulombCoulomb,aFrencharrived at the relation, Eq. (1.1).physicist,beganhiscareerCoulombs law, a simple mathematical statement,as a military engineer inwas initially experimentally arrived at in the mannerthe West Indies. In 1776, hedescribed above. While the original experimentsreturned to Paris andestablished it at a macroscopic scale, it has also beenretired to a small estate toestablished down to subatomic level (r ~ 1010 m).do his scientific research.Coulomb discovered his law without knowing theHe invented a torsionexplicit magnitude of the charge. In fact, it is the otherbalance to measure thequantity of a force and usedway round: Coulombs law can now be employed toit for determination offurnish a definition for a unit of charge. In the relation,forces of electric attractionEq. (1.1), k is so far arbitrary. We can choose any positiveor repulsion between smallvalue of k. The choice of k determines the size of the unitcharged spheres. He thus9of charge. In SI units, the value of k is about 9  10 .arrived in 1785 at theThe unit of charge that results from this choice is calledinverse square law relation,a coulomb which we defined earlier in Section 1.4.now known as CoulombsPutting this value of k in Eq. (1.1), we see that forlaw. The law had beenq1 = q2 = 1 C, r = 1 manticipated by Priestley andalso by Cavendish earlier,F = 9  109 Nthough Cavendish neverThat is, 1 C is the charge that when placed at apublished his results.distance of 1 m from another charge of the sameCoulomb also found themagnitude in vacuum experiences an electrical force ofinverse square law of forcerepulsion of magnitude 9  109 N. One coulomb isbetween unlike and likeevidently too big a unit to be used. In practice, inmagnetic poles.electrostatics, one uses smaller units like 1 mC or 1 C.The constant k in Eq. (1.1) is usually put ask = 1/40 for later convenience, so that Coulombs law is written asq1 q21(1.2)4  0r20 is called the permittivity of free space . The value of 0 in SI units isF = 0 = 8.854  1012 C2 N1m2* Implicit in this is the assumption of additivity of charges and conservation:two charges (q/2 each) add up to make a total charge q.11PhysicsSince force is a vector, it is better to writeCoulombs law in the vector notation. Let theposition vectors of charges q1 and q2 be r1 and r2respectively [see Fig.1.6(a)]. We denote force onq1 due to q2 by F12 and force on q2 due to q1 byF21. The two point charges q1 and q2 have beennumbered 1 and 2 for convenience and the vectorleading from 1 to 2 is denoted by r21:r21 = r2  r1In the same way, the vector leading from 2 to1 is denoted by r12:r12 = r1  r2 =  r21The magnitude of the vectors r21 and r12 isdenoted by r21 and r12 , respectively (r12 = r21). Thedirection of a vector is specified by a unit vectoralong the vector. To denote the direction from 1to 2 (or from 2 to 1), we define the unit vectors:FIGURE 1.6 (a) Geometry and(b) Forces between charges.r21 =r21rr12 = 12 ,,r21r12r21 = r12Coulombs force law between two point charges q1 and q2 located atr1 and r2 is then expressed asF21 =1q1 q 2r2124  or21(1.3)Some remarks on Eq. (1.3) are relevant: Equation (1.3) is valid for any sign of q1 and q2 whether positive ornegative. If q1 and q2 are of the same sign (either both positive or bothnegative), F21 is along r 21, which denotes repulsion, as it should be forlike charges. If q1 and q2 are of opposite signs, F21 is along  r 21(= r 12),which denotes attraction, as expected for unlike charges. Thus, we donot have to write separate equations for the cases of like and unlikecharges. Equation (1.3) takes care of both cases correctly [Fig. 1.6(b)]. The force F12 on charge q1 due to charge q2, is obtained from Eq. (1.3),by simply interchanging 1 and 2, i.e.,F12 =1q1 q 2r12 = F2124  0r12Thus, Coulombs law agrees with the Newtons third law.12Coulombs law [Eq. (1.3)] gives the force between two charges q1 andq2 in vacuum. If the charges are placed in matter or the interveningspace has matter, the situation gets complicated due to the presenceof charged constituents of matter. We shall consider electrostatics inmatter in the next chapter.Electric Chargesand FieldsExample 1.4 Coulombs law for electrostatic force between two pointcharges and Newtons law for gravitational force between twostationary point masses, both have inverse-square dependence onthe distance between the charges/masses. (a) Compare the strengthof these forces by determining the ratio of their magnitudes (i) for anelectron and a proton and (ii) for two protons. (b) Estimate theaccelerations of electron and proton due to the electrical force of theirmutual attraction when they are 1  (= 10-10 m) apart? (mp = 1.67 1027 kg, me = 9.11  1031 kg)1 e24  0 r 2where the negative sign indicates that the force is attractive. Thecorresponding gravitational force (always attractive) is:Fe = FG = Gm p mer2where mp and me are the masses of a proton and an electronrespectively.Fee2== 2.4  1039FG4  0Gm pm e(ii) On similar lines, the ratio of the magnitudes of electric forceto the gravitational force between two protons at a distance rapart is :Fee2== 1.3  10364  0Gm p m pFGHowever, it may be mentioned here that the signs of the two forcesare different. For two protons, the gravitational force is attractivein nature and the Coulomb force is repulsive . The actual valuesof these forces between two protons inside a nucleus (distancebetween two protons is ~ 10-15 m inside a nucleus) are Fe ~ 230 Nwhereas FG ~ 1.9  1034 N.The (dimensionless) ratio of the two forces shows that electricalforces are enormously stronger than the gravitational forces.(b) The electric force F exerted by a proton on an electron is same inmagnitude to the force exerted by an electron on a proton; howeverthe masses of an electron and a proton are different. Thus, themagnitude of force is1 e2= 8.987  109 Nm2/C2  (1.6 1019C)2 / (1010m)24  0 r 2= 2.3  108 NUsing Newtons second law of motion, F = ma, the accelerationthat an electron will undergo isa = 2.3108 N / 9.11 1031 kg = 2.5  1022 m/s2Comparing this with the value of acceleration due to gravity, wecan conclude that the effect of gravitational field is negligible onthe motion of electron and it undergoes very large accelerationsunder the action of Coulomb force due to a proton.The value for acceleration of the proton isInteractive animation on Coulombs law:http://webphysics.davidson.edu/physlet_resources/bu_semester2/co1_coulomb.htmlSolution(a) (i) The electric force between an electron and a proton at a distancer apart is:|F| =EXAMPLE 1.42.3  108 N / 1.67  1027 kg = 1.4  1019 m/s213Physics14EXAMPLE 1.5Example 1.5 A charged metallic sphere A is suspended by a nylonthread. Another charged metallic sphere B held by an insulatinghandle is brought close to A such that the distance between theircentres is 10 cm, as shown in Fig. 1.7(a). The resulting repulsion of Ais noted (for example, by shining a beam of light and measuring thedeflection of its shadow on a screen). Spheres A and B are touchedby uncharged spheres C and D respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.7(b).C and D are then removed and B is brought closer to A to adistance of 5.0 cm between their centres, as shown in Fig. 1.7(c).What is the expected repulsion of A on the basis of Coulombs law?Spheres A and C and spheres B and D have identical sizes. Ignorethe sizes of A and B in comparison to the separation between theircentres.FIGURE 1.7Electric Chargesand FieldsSolution Let the original charge on sphere A be q and that on B beq. At a distance r between their centres, the magnitude of theelectrostatic force on each is given byF =1 qq 4  0 r 2neglecting the sizes of spheres A and B in comparison to r. When anidentical but uncharged sphere C touches A, the charges redistributeon A and C and, by symmetry, each sphere carries a charge q/2.Similarly, after D touches B, the redistributed charge on each isq/2. Now, if the separation between A and B is halved, the magnitudeof the electrostatic force on each is1 (q / 2)(q  /2)1 (qq  )==F24  04 0 r 2(r /2)Thus the electrostatic force on A, due to B, remains unaltered.1.7 FORCESBETWEENEXAMPLE 1.5F =MULTIPLE CHARGESThe mutual electric force between two charges is givenby Coulombs law. How to calculate the force on acharge where there are not one but several chargesaround? Consider a system of n stationary chargesq1, q2, q3, ..., qn in vacuum. What is the force on q1 dueto q2, q3, ..., qn? Coulombs law is not enough to answerthis question. Recall that forces of mechanical originadd according to the parallelogram law of addition. Isthe same true for forces of electrostatic origin?Experimentally it is verified that force on anycharge due to a number of other charges is the vectorsum of all the forces on that charge due to the othercharges, taken one at a time. The individual forcesare unaffected due to the presence of other charges.This is termed as the principle of superposition.To better understand the concept, consider asystem of three charges q1, q2 and q3, as shown inFig. 1.8(a). The force on one charge, say q1, due to twoother charges q2, q3 can therefore be obtained byperforming a vector addition of the forces due to eachone of these charges. Thus, if the force on q1 due to q2is denoted by F12, F12 is given by Eq. (1.3) even thoughother charges are present.1 q1q 2r1224 0 r12In the same way, the force on q1 due to q3, denotedby F13, is given byThus, F12 =F13 =1 q1q3r1324  0 r13FIGURE 1.8 A system of (a) threecharges (b) multiple charges.15Physicswhich again is the Coulomb force on q1 due to q3, even though othercharge q2 is present.Thus the total force F1 on q1 due to the two charges q2 and q3 isgiven asF1 = F12 + F13 =1 q1q 21 q1q 3r12 +r13224 0 r124  0 r13(1.4)The above calculation of force can be generalised to a system ofcharges more than three, as shown in Fig. 1.8(b).The principle of superposition says that in a system of charges q1,q2, ..., qn, the force on q1 due to q2 is the same as given by Coulombs law,i.e., it is unaffected by the presence of the other charges q3, q4, ..., qn. Thetotal force F1 on the charge q1, due to all other charges, is then given bythe vector sum of the forces F12, F13, ..., F1n:i.e.,F1 = F12 + F13 + ...+ F1n =14  0 q1q 2q1q 3q1qn 2 r12 + 2 r13 + ... + 2 r1n r13r1n r12q1 n qi r1i(1.5)4  0 i = 2 r12iThe vector sum is obtained as usual by the parallelogram law ofaddition of vectors. All of electrostatics is basically a consequence ofCoulombs law and the superposition principle.=16EXAMPLE 1.6Example 1.6 Consider three charges q1, q2, q3 each equal to q at thevertices of an equilateral triangle of side l. What is the force on acharge Q (with the same sign as q) placed at the centroid of thetriangle, as shown in Fig. 1.9?FIGURE 1.9Solution In the given equilateral triangle ABC of sides of length l, ifwe draw a perpendicular AD to the side BC,AD = AC cos 30 = ( 3 /2 ) l and the distance AO of the centroid Ofrom A is (2/3) AD = ( 1/ 3 ) l. By symmatry AO = BO = CO.Electric Chargesand FieldsThus,34  03Force F2 on Q due to charge q at B = 4 0Force F1 on Q due to charge q at A =Qqalong AOl2Qqalong BOl23 QqForce F3 on Q due to charge q at C = 4  2 along CO0 l3 QqThe resultant of forces F 2 and F 3 is 4  2 along OA, by the0 l3 Qqparallelogram law. Therefore, the total force on Q = 4  2 ( r  r )0 lEXAMPLE 1.6= 0, where r is the unit vector along OA.It is clear also by symmetry that the three forces will sum to zero.Suppose that the resultant force was non-zero but in some direction.Consider what would happen if the system was rotated through 60about O.Example 1.7 Consider the charges q, q, and q placed at the verticesof an equilateral triangle, as shown in Fig. 1.10. What is the force oneach charge?FIGURE 1.10Solution The forces acting on charge q at A due to charges q at Band q at C are F12 along BA and F13 along AC respectively, as shownin Fig. 1.10. By the parallelogram law, the total force F1 on the chargeq at A is given byF1 = F r1 where r1 is a unit vector along BC.The force of attraction or repulsion for each pair of charges has theq24  0 l 2The total force F2 on charge q at B is thus F2 = F r 2, where r 2 is aunit vector along AC.EXAMPLE 1.7same magnitude F =17EXAMPLE 1.7PhysicsSimilarly the total force on charge q at C is F3 = 3 F n , where n isthe unit vector along the direction bisecting the BCA.It is interesting to see that the sum of the forces on the three chargesis zero, i.e.,F1 + F2 + F3 = 0The result is not at all surprising. It follows straight from the factthat Coulombs law is consistent with Newtons third law. The proofis left to you as an exercise.1.8 ELECTRIC FIELDLet us consider a point charge Q placed in vacuum, at the origin O. If weplace another point charge q at a point P, where OP = r, then the charge Qwill exert a force on q as per Coulombs law. We may ask the question: Ifcharge q is removed, then what is left in the surrounding? Is therenothing? If there is nothing at the point P, then how does a force actwhen we place the charge q at P. In order to answer such questions, theearly scientists introduced the concept of field. According to this, we saythat the charge Q produces an electric field everywhere in the surrounding.When another charge q is brought at some point P, the field there acts onit and produces a force. The electric field produced by the charge Q at apoint r is given as1 Q1 QE ( r) =r =r(1.6)24  0 r4  0 r 2where r = r/r, is a unit vector from the origin to the point r. Thus, Eq.(1.6)specifies the value of the electric field for each value of the positionvector r. The word field signifies how some distributed quantity (whichcould be a scalar or a vector) varies with position. The effect of the chargehas been incorporated in the existence of the electric field. We obtain theforce F exerted by a charge Q on a charge q, as1 QqF=r(1.7)4  0 r 2Note that the charge q also exerts an equal and opposite force on thecharge Q. The electrostatic force between the charges Q and q can belooked upon as an interaction between charge q and the electric field ofQ and vice versa. If we denote the position of charge q by the vector r, itexperiences a force F equal to the charge q multiplied by the electricfield E at the location of q. Thus,F(r) = q E(r)(1.8)Equation (1.8) defines the SI unit of electric field as N/C*.Some important remarks may be made here:(i) From Eq. (1.8), we can infer that if q is unity, the electric field due toa charge Q is numerically equal to the force exerted by it. Thus, theFIGURE 1.11 Electricelectric field due to a charge Q at a point in space may be definedfield (a) due to aas the force that a unit positive charge would experience if placedcharge Q, (b) due to acharge Q.18* An alternate unit V/m will be introduced in the next chapter.Electric Chargesand Fieldsat that point. The charge Q, which is producing the electric field, iscalled a source charge and the charge q, which tests the effect of asource charge, is called a test charge. Note that the source charge Qmust remain at its original location. However, if a charge q is broughtat any point around Q, Q itself is bound to experience an electricalforce due to q and will tend to move. A way out of this difficulty is tomake q negligibly small. The force F is then negligibly small but theratio F/q is finite and defines the electric field: FE = lim  q 0  q (1.9)A practical way to get around the problem (of keeping Q undisturbedin the presence of q) is to hold Q to its location by unspecified forces!This may look strange but actually this is what happens in practice.When we are considering the electric force on a test charge q due to acharged planar sheet (Section 1.15), the charges on the sheet are held totheir locations by the forces due to the unspecified charged constituentsinside the sheet.(ii) Note that the electric field E due to Q, though defined operationallyin terms of some test charge q, is independent of q. This is becauseF is proportional to q, so the ratio F/q does not depend on q. Theforce F on the charge q due to the charge Q depends on the particularlocation of charge q which may take any value in the space aroundthe charge Q. Thus, the electric field E due to Q is also dependent onthe space coordinate r. For different positions of the charge q all overthe space, we get different values of electric field E. The field exists atevery point in three-dimensional space.(iii) For a positive charge, the electric field will be directed radiallyoutwards from the charge. On the other hand, if the source charge isnegative, the electric field vector, at each point, points radially inwards.(iv) Since the magnitude of the force F on charge q due to charge Qdepends only on the distance r of the charge q from charge Q,the magnitude of the electric field E will also depend only on thedistance r. Thus at equal distances from the charge Q, the magnitudeof its electric field E is same. The magnitude of electric field E due toa point charge is thus same on a sphere with the point charge at itscentre; in other words, it has a spherical symmetry.1.8.1 Electric field due to a system of chargesConsider a system of charges q1, q2, ..., qn with position vectors r1,r2, ..., rn relative to some origin O. Like the electric field at a point inspace due to a single charge, electric field at a point in space due to thesystem of charges is defined to be the force experienced by a unittest charge placed at that point, without disturbing the originalpositions of charges q1, q2, ..., qn. We can use Coulombs law and thesuperposition principle to determine this field at a point P denoted byposition vector r.19PhysicsElectric field E1 at r due to q1 at r1 is given byE1 =1 q1r1P4  0 r1P2where r1P is a unit vector in the direction from q1 to P,and r1P is the distance between q1 and P.In the same manner, electric field E2 at r due to q2 atr2 isE2 =FIGURE 1.12 Electric field at apoint due to a system of charges isthe vector sum of the electric fieldsat the point due to individualcharges.=E(r) =1 q2r2P4 0 r22Pwhere r2P is a unit vector in the direction from q2 to Pand r 2P is the distance between q 2 and P. Similarexpressions hold good for fields E3, E4, ..., En due tocharges q3, q4, ..., qn.By the superposition principle, the electric field E at rdue to the system of charges is (as shown in Fig. 1.12)E(r) = E1 (r) + E2 (r) +  + En(r)1 q11 q21 qnr +r2P + ... +rnP2 1P24  0 r1P4  0 r2P4  0 rn2P14  0nq r 2i ri P(1.10)i =1 i PE is a vector quantity that varies from one point to another point in spaceand is determined from the positions of the source charges.1.8.2 Physical significance of electric field20You may wonder why the notion of electric field has been introducedhere at all. After all, for any system of charges, the measurable quantityis the force on a charge which can be directly determined using Coulombslaw and the superposition principle [Eq. (1.5)]. Why then introduce thisintermediate quantity called the electric field?For electrostatics, the concept of electric field is convenient, but notreally necessary. Electric field is an elegant way of characterising theelectrical environment of a system of charges. Electric field at a point inthe space around a system of charges tells you the force a unit positivetest charge would experience if placed at that point (without disturbingthe system). Electric field is a characteristic of the system of charges andis independent of the test charge that you place at a point to determinethe field. The term field in physics generally refers to a quantity that isdefined at every point in space and may vary from point to point. Electricfield is a vector field, since force is a vector quantity.The true physical significance of the concept of electric field, however,emerges only when we go beyond electrostatics and deal with timedependent electromagnetic phenomena. Suppose we consider the forcebetween two distant charges q1, q2 in accelerated motion. Now the greatestspeed with which a signal or information can go from one point to anotheris c, the speed of light. Thus, the effect of any motion of q1 on q2 cannotElectric Chargesand Fieldsarise instantaneously. There will be some time delay between the effect(force on q2) and the cause (motion of q1). It is precisely here that thenotion of electric field (strictly, electromagnetic field) is natural and veryuseful. The field picture is this: the accelerated motion of charge q1produces electromagnetic waves, which then propagate with the speedc, reach q2 and cause a force on q2. The notion of field elegantly accountsfor the time delay. Thus, even though electric and magnetic fields can bedetected only by their effects (forces) on charges, they are regarded asphysical entities, not merely mathematical constructs. They have anindependent dynamics of their own, i.e., they evolve according to lawsof their own. They can also transport energy. Thus, a source of timedependent electromagnetic fields, turned on briefly and switched off, leavesbehind propagating electromagnetic fields transporting energy. Theconcept of field was first introduced by Faraday and is now among thecentral concepts in physics.Example 1.8 An electron falls through a distance of 1.5 cm in auniform electric field of magnitude 2.0  104 N C1 [Fig. 1.13(a)]. Thedirection of the field is reversed keeping its magnitude unchangedand a proton falls through the same distance [Fig. 1.13(b)]. Computethe time of fall in each case. Contrast the situation with that of freefall under gravity.FIGURE 1.13Solution In Fig. 1.13(a) the field is upward, so the negatively chargedelectron experiences a downward force of magnitude eE where E isthe magnitude of the electric field. The acceleration of the electron isae = eE/mewhere me is the mass of the electron.Starting from rest, the time required by the electron to fall through adistance h is given by t e =2h=ae2h m eeEFor e = 1.6  1019C, me = 9.11  1031 kg,E = 2.0  104 N C1, h = 1.5  102 m,te = 2.9  109sap = eE/mpwhere mp is the mass of the proton; mp = 1.67  1027 kg. The time offall for the proton isEXAMPLE 1.8In Fig. 1.13 (b), the field is downward, and the positively chargedproton experiences a downward force of magnitude eE . Theacceleration of the proton is21Physics2h=aptp =2h m peE= 1.3  10 7 sThus, the heavier particle (proton) takes a greater time to fall throughthe same distance. This is in basic contrast to the situation of freefall under gravity where the time of fall is independent of the mass ofthe body. Note that in this example we have ignored the accelerationdue to gravity in calculating the time of fall. To see if this is justified,let us calculate the acceleration of the proton in the given electricfield:ap =eEmpEXAMPLE 1.8=(1.6  1019 C)  (2.0  10 4 N C 1 )1.67  10 27 kg= 1.9  1012 m s 2which is enormous compared to the value of g (9.8 m s 2), theacceleration due to gravity. The acceleration of the electron is evengreater. Thus, the effect of acceleration due to gravity can be ignoredin this example.Example 1.9 Two point charges q1 and q2, of magnitude +108 C and108 C, respectively, are placed 0.1 m apart. Calculate the electricfields at points A, B and C shown in Fig. 1.14.FIGURE 1.14Solution The electric field vector E1A at A due to the positive chargeq1 points towards the right and has a magnitude22EXAMPLE 1.9E1A =(9  109 Nm 2C-2 )  (10 8 C)= 3.6  104 N C1(0.05 m)2The electric field vector E2A at A due to the negative charge q2 pointstowards the right and has the same magnitude. Hence the magnitudeof the total electric field EA at A isEA = E1A + E2A = 7.2  104 N C1EA is directed toward the right.Electric Chargesand FieldsThe electric field vector E1B at B due to the positive charge q1 pointstowards the left and has a magnitudeE1B =(9  109 Nm2 C 2 )  (10 8 C)= 3.6  104 N C1(0.05 m)2The electric field vector E2B at B due to the negative charge q2 pointstowards the right and has a magnitudeE 2B =(9  109 Nm 2 C 2 )  (10 8 C)= 4  103 N C1(0.15 m)2The magnitude of the total electric field at B isEB = E1B  E2B = 3.2  104 N C1EB is directed towards the left.The magnitude of each electric field vector at point C, due to chargeq1 and q2 isE1C = E2C =(9  109 Nm 2C 2 )  (108 C)= 9  103 N C1(0.10 m)2+ E 2 cos= 9  103 N C133EC points towards the right.E C = E1 cosEXAMPLE 1.9The directions in which these two vectors point are indicated inFig. 1.14. The resultant of these two vectors is1.9 ELECTRIC FIELD LINESWe have studied electric field in the last section. It is a vector quantityand can be represented as we represent vectors. Let us try to represent Edue to a point charge pictorially. Let the point charge be placed at theorigin. Draw vectors pointing along the direction of the electric field withtheir lengths proportional to the strength of the field ateach point. Since the magnitude of electric field at a pointdecreases inversely as the square of the distance of thatpoint from the charge, the vector gets shorter as one goesaway from the origin, always pointing radially outward.Figure 1.15 shows such a picture. In this figure, eacharrow indicates the electric field, i.e., the force acting on aunit positive charge, placed at the tail of that arrow.Connect the arrows pointing in one direction and theresulting figure represents a field line. We thus get manyfield lines, all pointing outwards from the point charge.Have we lost the information about the strength ormagnitude of the field now, because it was contained inthe length of the arrow? No. Now the magnitude of thefield is represented by the density of field lines. E is strongnear the charge, so the density of field lines is more nearthe charge and the lines are closer. Away from the charge, FIGURE 1.15 Field of a point charge.the field gets weaker and the density of field lines is less,resulting in well-separated lines.Another person may draw more lines. But the number of lines is not23important. In fact, an infinite number of lines can be drawn in any region.PhysicsIt is the relative density of lines in different regions which isimportant.We draw the figure on the plane of paper, i.e., in twodimensions but we live in three-dimensions. So if one wishesto estimate the density of field lines, one has to consider thenumber of lines per unit cross-sectional area, perpendicularto the lines. Since the electric field decreases as the square ofthe distance from a point charge and the area enclosing thecharge increases as the square of the distance, the numberof field lines crossing the enclosing area remains constant,whatever may be the distance of the area from the charge.We started by saying that the field lines carry informationabout the direction of electric field at different points in space.FIGURE 1.16 Dependence ofHaving drawn a certain set of field lines, the relative densityelectric field strength on the(i.e., closeness) of the field lines at different points indicatesdistance and its relation to thethe relative strength of electric field at those points. The fieldnumber of field lines.lines crowd where the field is strong and are spaced apartwhere it is weak. Figure 1.16 shows a set of field lines. Wecan imagine two equal and small elements of area placed at points R andS normal to the field lines there. The number of field lines in our picturecutting the area elements is proportional to the magnitude of field atthese points. The picture shows that the field at R is stronger than at S.To understand the dependence of the field lines on the area, or ratherthe solid angle subtended by an area element, let us try to relate thearea with the solid angle, a generalization of angle to three dimensions.Recall how a (plane) angle is defined in two-dimensions. Let a smalltransverse line element l be placed at a distance r from a point O. Thenthe angle subtended by l at O can be approximated as  = l/r.Likewise, in three-dimensions the solid angle* subtended by a smallperpendicular plane area S, at a distance r, can be written as = S/r2. We know that in a given solid angle the number of radialfield lines is the same. In Fig. 1.16, for two points P1 and P2 at distancesr1 and r2 from the charge, the element of area subtending the solid angle is r12  at P1 and an element of area r22  at P2, respectively. Thenumber of lines (say n) cutting these area elements are the same. Thenumber of field lines, cutting unit area element is therefore n/( r12 ) atP1 andn/( r22 ) at P2 , respectively. Since n and  are common, thestrength of the field clearly has a 1/r 2 dependence.The picture of field lines was invented by Faraday to develop anintuitive non- mathematical way of visualizing electric fields aroundcharged configurations. Faraday called them lines of force. This term issomewhat misleading, especially in case of magnetic fields. The moreappropriate term is field lines (electric or magnetic) that we haveadopted in this book.Electric field lines are thus a way of pictorially mapping the electricfield around a configuration of charges. An electric field line is, in general,24* Solid angle is a measure of a cone. Consider the intersection of the given conewith a sphere of radius R. The solid angle  of the cone is defined to be equal2to S/R , where S is the area on the sphere cut out by the cone.Electric Chargesand Fieldsa curve drawn in such a way that the tangent to it at eachpoint is in the direction of the net field at that point. Anarrow on the curve is obviously necessary to specify thedirection of electric field from the two possible directionsindicated by a tangent to the curve. A field line is a spacecurve, i.e., a curve in three dimensions.Figure 1.17 shows the field lines around some simplecharge configurations. As mentioned earlier, the field linesare in 3-dimensional space, though the figure shows themonly in a plane. The field lines of a single positive chargeare radially outward while those of a single negativecharge are radially inward. The field lines around a systemof two positive charges (q, q) give a vivid pictorialdescription of their mutual repulsion, while those aroundthe configuration of two equal and opposite charges(q, q), a dipole, show clearly the mutual attractionbetween the charges. The field lines follow some importantgeneral properties:(i) Field lines start from positive charges and end atnegative charges. If there is a single charge, they maystart or end at infinity.(ii) In a charge-free region, electric field lines can be takento be continuous curves without any breaks.(iii) Two field lines can never cross each other. (If they did,the field at the point of intersection will not have aunique direction, which is absurd.)(iv) Electrostatic field lines do not form any closed loops.This follows from the conservative nature of electricfield (Chapter 2).1.10 ELECTRIC FLUXConsider flow of a liquid with velocity v, through a smallflat surface dS, in a direction normal to the surface. Therate of flow of liquid is given by the volume crossing thearea per unit time v dS and represents the flux of liquidflowing across the plane. If the normal to the surface isnot parallel to the direction of flow of liquid, i.e., to v, butmakes an angle  with it, the projected area in a planeperpendicular to v is v dS cos . Therefore the flux goingout of the surface dS is v. n dS.For the case of the electric field, we define ananalogous quantity and call it electric flux.We should however note that there is no flow of aphysically observable quantity unlike the case of liquidflow.In the picture of electric field lines described above,we saw that the number of field lines crossing a unit area,placed normal to the field at a point is a measure of thestrength of electric field at that point. This means that ifFIGURE 1.17 Field lines due tosome simple charge configurations.25Physicswe place a small planar element of area Snormal to E at a point, the number of field linescrossing it is proportional* to E S. Nowsuppose we tilt the area element by angle .Clearly, the number of field lines crossing thearea element will be smaller. The projection ofthe area element normal to E is S cos. Thus,the number of field lines crossing S isproportional to E S cos. When  = 90, fieldlines will be parallel to S and will not cross itat all (Fig. 1.18).The orientation of area element and notmerely its magnitude is important in manycontexts. For example, in a stream, the amountof water flowing through a ring will naturallydepend on how you hold the ring. If you holdit normal to the flow, maximum water will flowFIGURE 1.18 Dependence of flux on thethrough it than if you hold it with some otherinclination  between E and n .orientation. This shows that an area elementshould be treated as a vector. It has amagnitude and also a direction. How to specify the direction of a planararea? Clearly, the normal to the plane specifies the orientation of theplane. Thus the direction of a planar area vector is along its normal.How to associate a vector to the area of a curved surface? We imaginedividing the surface into a large number of very small area elements.Each small area element may be treated as planar and a vector associatedwith it, as explained before.Notice one ambiguity here. The direction of an area element is alongits normal. But a normal can point in two directions. Which direction dowe choose as the direction of the vector associated with the area element?This problem is resolved by some convention appropriate to the givencontext. For the case of a closed surface, this convention is very simple.The vector associated with every area element of a closed surface is takento be in the direction of the outward normal. This is the convention usedin Fig. 1.19. Thus, the area element vector S at a point on a closedsurface equals S n where S is the magnitude of the area element andn is a unit vector in the direction of outward normal at that point.We now come to the definition of electric flux. Electric flux  throughan area element S is defined by = E.S = E S cos(1.11)FIGURE 1.19Convention fordefining normaln and S.26which, as seen before, is proportional to the number of field lines cuttingthe area element. The angle  here is the angle between E and S. For aclosed surface, with the convention stated already,  is the angle betweenE and the outward normal to the area element. Notice we could look atthe expression E S cos in two ways: E (S cos ) i.e., E times the* It will not be proper to say that the number of field lines is equal to ES. Thenumber of field lines is after all, a matter of how many field lines we choose todraw. What is physically significant is the relative number of field lines crossinga given area at different points.Electric Chargesand Fieldsprojection of area normal to E, or E S, i.e., component of E along thenormal to the area element times the magnitude of the area element. Theunit of electric flux is N C1 m2.The basic definition of electric flux given by Eq. (1.11) can be used, inprinciple, to calculate the total flux through any given surface. All wehave to do is to divide the surface into small area elements, calculate theflux at each element and add them up. Thus, the total flux  through asurface S is ~  E.S(1.12)The approximation sign is put because the electric field E is taken tobe constant over the small area element. This is mathematically exactonly when you take the limit S  0 and the sum in Eq. (1.12) is writtenas an integral.1.11 ELECTRIC DIPOLEAn electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite point charges q and q,separated by a distance 2a. The line connecting the two charges definesa direction in space. By convention, the direction from q to q is said tobe the direction of the dipole. The mid-point of locations of q and q iscalled the centre of the dipole.The total charge of the electric dipole is obviously zero. This does notmean that the field of the electric dipole is zero. Since the charge q andq are separated by some distance, the electric fields due to them, whenadded, do not exactly cancel out. However, at distances much larger thanthe separation of the two charges forming a dipole (r >> 2a), the fieldsdue to q and q nearly cancel out. The electric field due to a dipoletherefore falls off, at large distance, faster than like 1/r 2 (the dependenceon r of the field due to a single charge q). These qualitative ideas areborne out by the explicit calculation as follows:1.11.1 The field of an electric dipoleThe electric field of the pair of charges (q and q) at any point in spacecan be found out from Coulombs law and the superposition principle.The results are simple for the following two cases: (i) when the point is onthe dipole axis, and (ii) when it is in the equatorial plane of the dipole,i.e., on a plane perpendicular to the dipole axis through its centre. Theelectric field at any general point P is obtained by adding the electricfields Eq due to the charge q and E+q due to the charge q, by theparallelogram law of vectors.(i) For points on the axisLet the point P be at distance r from the centre of the dipole on the side ofthe charge q, as shown in Fig. 1.20(a). ThenqE q = p[1.13(a)]4  0 (r + a )2where p is the unit vector along the dipole axis (from q to q). AlsoE +q =qp4   0 (r  a )2[1.13(b)]27PhysicsThe total field at P isE = E +q + E  q =q  11 p24   0  (r  a )(r + a )2 4a rqp4   o ( r 2  a 2 )2=(1.14)For r >> aE=4qap4   0r 3(r >> a)(1.15)(ii) For points on the equatorial planeThe magnitudes of the electric fields due to the twocharges +q and q are given byFIGURE 1.20 Electric field of a dipoleat (a) a point on the axis, (b) a pointon the equatorial plane of the dipole.p is the dipole moment vector ofmagnitude p = q  2a anddirected from q to q.E +q =q14  0 r 2 + a 2[1.16(a)]E q =q124  0 r + a 2[1.16(b)]and are equal.The directions of E +q and E q are as shown inFig. 1.20(b). Clearly, the components normal to the dipoleaxis cancel away. The components along the dipole axisadd up. The total electric field is opposite to p . We haveE =  (E +q + E q ) cos p=2qap4   o (r 2 + a 2 )3 / 2(1.17)At large distances (r >> a), this reduces to2qa(r >> a )p(1.18)4  o r 3From Eqs. (1.15) and (1.18), it is clear that the dipole field at largedistances does not involve q and a separately; it depends on the productqa. This suggests the definition of dipole moment. The dipole momentvector p of an electric dipole is defined byp = q  2a p(1.19)that is, it is a vector whose magnitude is charge q times the separation2a (between the pair of charges q, q) and the direction is along the linefrom q to q. In terms of p, the electric field of a dipole at large distancestakes simple forms:At a point on the dipole axisE=E=2p4  o r 3(r >> a)(1.20)At a point on the equatorial plane28E=p4  o r 3(r >> a)(1.21)Electric Chargesand FieldsNotice the important point that the dipole field at large distancesfalls off not as 1/r 2 but as1/r 3. Further, the magnitude and the directionof the dipole field depends not only on the distance r but also on theangle between the position vector r and the dipole moment p.We can think of the limit when the dipole size 2a approaches zero,the charge q approaches infinity in such a way that the productp = q  2a is finite. Such a dipole is referred to as a point dipole. For apoint dipole, Eqs. (1.20) and (1.21) are exact, true for any r.1.11.2 Physical significance of dipolesIn most molecules, the centres of positive charges and of negative charges*lie at the same place. Therefore, their dipole moment is zero. CO2 andCH4 are of this type of molecules. However, they develop a dipole momentwhen an electric field is applied. But in some molecules, the centres ofnegative charges and of positive charges do not coincide. Therefore theyhave a permanent electric dipole moment, even in the absence of an electricfield. Such molecules are called polar molecules. Water molecules, H2O,is an example of this type. Various materials give rise to interestingproperties and important applications in the presence or absence ofelectric field.Example 1.10 Two charges 10 C are placed 5.0 mm apart.Determine the electric field at (a) a point P on the axis of the dipole15 cm away from its centre O on the side of the positive charge, asshown in Fig. 1.21(a), and (b) a point Q, 15 cm away from O on a linepassing through O and normal to the axis of the dipole, as shown inFig. 1.21(b).EXAMPLE 1.10FIGURE 1.21* Centre of a collection of positive point charges is defined much the same wayas the centre of mass: rcm = qi rii qii.29PhysicsSolution (a) Field at P due to charge +10 C=10 5 C4  (8.854  10122C N12m )1(15  0.25)2  10 4 m 2= 4.13  106 N C1 along BPField at P due to charge 10 C=110 5 C(15 + 0.25)2  10 4 m 24  (8.854  10 12 C2 N 1 m 2 )= 3.86  106 N C1 along PAThe resultant electric field at P due to the two charges at A and B is= 2.7  105 N C1 along BP.In this example, the ratio OP/OB is quite large (= 60). Thus, we canexpect to get approximately the same result as above by directly usingthe formula for electric field at a far-away point on the axis of a dipole.For a dipole consisting of charges  q, 2a distance apart, the electricfield at a distance r from the centre on the axis of the dipole has amagnitude2pE =(r/a >> 1)4 0r 3where p = 2a q is the magnitude of the dipole moment.The direction of electric field on the dipole axis is always along thedirection of the dipole moment vector (i.e., from q to q). Here,p =105 C  5  103 m = 5  108 C mTherefore,E =2  5  108 C m4  (8.854  1012212C N m )1(15)3  10 6 m 3= 2.6  105 N C1along the dipole moment direction AB, which is close to the resultobtained earlier.(b) Field at Q due to charge + 10 C at B1105 C= 4  (8.854  10 12 C 2 N 1 m 2 )  [152 + (0.25)2 ]  10 4 m 2= 3.99  106 N C1 along BQField at Q due to charge 10 C at A10 5 C=1212[154  (8.854  10 C N m )= 3.99  106 N C1 along QA.2122+ (0.25)]  10 4 m 230EXAMPLE 1.10Clearly, the components of these two forces with equal magnitudescancel along the direction OQ but add up along the direction parallelto BA. Therefore, the resultant electric field at Q due to the twocharges at A and B is=20.25215+ (0.25)2 3.99  106 N C 1 along BA= 1.33  105 N C1 along BA.As in (a), we can expect to get approximately the same result bydirectly using the formula for dipole field at a point on the normal tothe axis of the dipole:Electric Chargesand FieldsE =(r/a >> 1)15  108 C m(15)3  10 6 m 34  (8.854  1012 C2 N 1 m 2 )= 1.33  105 N C1.The direction of electric field in this case is opposite to the directionof the dipole moment vector. Again the result agrees with that obtainedbefore.1.12 DIPOLEIN AEXAMPLE 1.10=p4  0 r 3UNIFORM EXTERNAL FIELDConsider a permanent dipole of dipole moment p in a uniformexternal field E, as shown in Fig. 1.22. (By permanent dipole, wemean that p exists irrespective of E; it has not been induced by E.)There is a force qE on q and a force qE on q. The net force onthe dipole is zero, since E is uniform. However, the charges areseparated, so the forces act at different points, resulting in a torqueon the dipole. When the net force is zero, the torque (couple) isindependent of the origin. Its magnitude equals the magnitude of FIGURE 1.22 Dipole in auniform electric field.each force multiplied by the arm of the couple (perpendiculardistance between the two antiparallel forces).Magnitude of torque = q E  2 a sin= 2 q a E sinIts direction is normal to the plane of the paper, coming out of it.The magnitude of p  E is also p E sin and its directionis normal to the paper, coming out of it. Thus,(1.22) =pEThis torque will tend to align the dipole with the fieldE. When p is aligned with E, the torque is zero.What happens if the field is not uniform? In that case,the net force will evidently be non-zero. In addition therewill, in general, be a torque on the system as before. Thegeneral case is involved, so let us consider the simplersituations when p is parallel to E or antiparallel to E. Ineither case, the net torque is zero, but there is a net forceon the dipole if E is not uniform.Figure 1.23 is self-explanatory. It is easily seen thatwhen p is parallel to E, the dipole has a net force in thedirection of increasing field. When p is antiparallel to E,the net force on the dipole is in the direction of decreasingfield. In general, the force depends on the orientation of pwith respect to E.This brings us to a common observation in frictionalelectricity. A comb run through dry hair attracts pieces ofpaper. The comb, as we know, acquires charge throughfriction. But the paper is not charged. What then explainsthe attractive force? Taking the clue from the precedingFIGURE 1.23 Electric force on adipole: (a) E parallel to p, (b) Eantiparallel to p.31Physicsdiscussion, the charged comb polarizes the piece of paper, i.e., inducesa net dipole moment in the direction of field. Further, the electric fielddue to the comb is not uniform. In this situation, it is easily seen that thepaper should move in the direction of the comb!1.13 CONTINUOUS CHARGE DISTRIBUTIONWe have so far dealt with charge configurations involving discrete chargesq1, q2, ..., qn. One reason why we restricted to discrete charges is that themathematical treatment is simpler and does not involve calculus. Formany purposes, however, it is impractical to work in terms of discretecharges and we need to work with continuous charge distributions. Forexample, on the surface of a charged conductor, it is impractical to specifythe charge distribution in terms of the locations of the microscopic chargedconstituents. It is more feasible to consider an area element S (Fig. 1.24)on the surface of the conductor (which is very small on the macroscopicscale but big enough to include a very large number of electrons) andspecify the charge Q on that element. We then define a surface chargedensity  at the area element byQ(1.23)SWe can do this at different points on the conductor and thus arrive ata continuous function , called the surface charge density. The surfacecharge density  so defined ignores the quantisation of charge and thediscontinuity in charge distribution at the microscopic level*.  representsmacroscopic surface charge density, which in a sense, is a smoothed outaverage of the microscopic charge density over an area element S which,as said before, is large microscopically but small macroscopically. Theunits for  are C/m2.Similar considerations apply for a line charge distribution and a volumecharge distribution. The linear charge density  of a wire is defined by=FIGURE 1.24Definition of linear,surface and volumecharge densities.In each case, theelement (l, S, V )chosen is small onthe macroscopicscale but containsa very large numberof microscopicconstituents.32Q(1.24)lwhere l is a small line element of wire on the macroscopic scale that,however, includes a large number of microscopic charged constituents,and Q is the charge contained in that line element. The units for  areC/m. The volume charge density (sometimes simply called charge density)is defined in a similar manner: =Q(1.25)Vwhere Q is the charge included in the macroscopically small volumeelement V that includes a large number of microscopic chargedconstituents. The units for  are C/m3.The notion of continuous charge distribution is similar to that weadopt for continuous mass distribution in mechanics. When we refer to=* At the microscopic level, charge distribution is discontinuous, because they arediscrete charges separated by intervening space where there is no charge.Electric Chargesand Fieldsthe density of a liquid, we are referring to its macroscopic density. Weregard it as a continuous fluid and ignore its discrete molecularconstitution.The field due to a continuous charge distribution can be obtained inmuch the same way as for a system of discrete charges, Eq. (1.10). Supposea continuous charge distribution in space has a charge density . Chooseany convenient origin O and let the position vector of any point in thecharge distribution be r. The charge density  may vary from point topoint, i.e., it is a function of r. Divide the charge distribution into smallvolume elements of size V. The charge in a volume element V is V.Now, consider any general point P (inside or outside the distribution)with position vector R (Fig. 1.24). Electric field due to the charge V isgiven by Coulombs law:1 Vr'(1.26)4  0r' 2where r is the distance between the charge element and P, and r  is aunit vector in the direction from the charge element to P. By thesuperposition principle, the total electric field due to the chargedistribution is obtained by summing over electric fields due to differentvolume elements:E =1 Vr'(1.27)4  0 all V r' 2Note that , r, r  all can vary from point to point. In a strictmathematical method, we should let V0 and the sum then becomesan integral; but we omit that discussion here, for simplicity. In short,using Coulombs law and the superposition principle, electric field canbe determined for any charge distribution, discrete or continuous or partdiscrete and part continuous.E1.14 GAUSSS LAWAs a simple application of the notion of electric flux, let us consider thetotal flux through a sphere of radius r, which encloses a point charge qat its centre. Divide the sphere into small area elements, as shown inFig. 1.25.The flux through an area element S isq = E i  S =r i S(1.28)4  0 r 2where we have used Coulombs law for the electric field due to a singlecharge q. The unit vector r is along the radius vector from the centre tothe area element. Now, since the normal to a sphere at every point isalong the radius vector at that point, the area element S and r havethe same direction. Therefore, =qSFIGURE 1.25 Fluxthrough a sphere(1.29)enclosing a pointcharge q at its centre.4  0 r 2since the magnitude of a unit vector is 1.The total flux through the sphere is obtained by adding up fluxthrough all the different area elements:33Physicsq= all S4  0 r 2SSince each area element of the sphere is at the samedistance r from the charge,FIGURE 1.26 Calculation of theflux of uniform electric fieldthrough the surface of a cylinder.=q4  o r S =2 all Sq4  0 r 2SNow S, the total area of the sphere, equals 4r 2. Thus,=q4  0 r2 4 r 2 =q0(1.30)Equation (1.30) is a simple illustration of a general result ofelectrostatics called Gausss law.We state Gausss law without proof:Electric flux through a closed surface S= q/0(1.31)q = total charge enclosed by S.The law implies that the total electric flux through a closed surface iszero if no charge is enclosed by the surface. We can see that explicitly inthe simple situation of Fig. 1.26.Here the electric field is uniform and we are considering a closedcylindrical surface, with its axis parallel to the uniform field E. The totalflux  through the surface is  = 1 + 2 + 3, where 1 and 2 representthe flux through the surfaces 1 and 2 (of circular cross-section) of thecylinder and 3 is the flux through the curved cylindrical part of theclosed surface. Now the normal to the surface 3 at every point isperpendicular to E, so by definition of flux, 3 = 0. Further, the outwardnormal to 2 is along E while the outward normal to 1 is opposite to E.Therefore,341 = E S1, 2 = +E S2S1 = S2 = Swhere S is the area of circular cross-section. Thus, the total flux is zero,as expected by Gausss law. Thus, whenever you find that the net electricflux through a closed surface is zero, we conclude that the total chargecontained in the closed surface is zero.The great significance of Gausss law Eq. (1.31), is that it is true ingeneral, and not only for the simple cases we have considered above. Letus note some important points regarding this law:(i) Gausss law is true for any closed surface, no matter what its shapeor size.(ii) The term q on the right side of Gausss law, Eq. (1.31), includes thesum of all charges enclosed by the surface. The charges may be locatedanywhere inside the surface.(iii) In the situation when the surface is so chosen that there are somecharges inside and some outside, the electric field [whose flux appearson the left side of Eq. (1.31)] is due to all the charges, both inside andoutside S. The term q on the right side of Gausss law, however,represents only the total charge inside S.Electric Chargesand Fields(iv) The surface that we choose for the application of Gausss law is calledthe Gaussian surface. You may choose any Gaussian surface andapply Gausss law. However, take care not to let the Gaussian surfacepass through any discrete charge. This is because electric field dueto a system of discrete charges is not well defined at the location ofany charge. (As you go close to the charge, the field grows withoutany bound.) However, the Gaussian surface can pass through acontinuous charge distribution.(v) Gausss law is often useful towards a much easier calculation of theelectrostatic field when the system has some symmetry. This isfacilitated by the choice of a suitable Gaussian surface.(vi) Finally, Gausss law is based on the inverse square dependence ondistance contained in the Coulombs law. Any violation of Gaussslaw will indicate departure from the inverse square law.Example 1.11 The electric field components in Fig. 1.27 areEx = x1/2, Ey = Ez = 0, in which  = 800 N/C m1/2. Calculate (a) theflux through the cube, and (b) the charge within the cube. Assumethat a = 0.1 m.FIGURE 1.27LLL= ELa2R= ER.S = ER S cos = ER S,= ERa2Net flux through the cubeLsince  = 0EXAMPLE 1.11Solution(a) Since the electric field has only an x component, for facesperpendicular to x direction, the angle between E and S is /2. Therefore, the flux  = E.S is separately zero for each faceof the cube except the two shaded ones. Now the magnitude ofthe electric field at the left face isEL = x1/2 = a1/2(x = a at the left face).The magnitude of electric field at the right face isER =  x1/2 =  (2a)1/2(x = 2a at the right face).The corresponding fluxes are L =E S cos = E S, since  = 180 = E .S = S E L  n35Physics= R + L = ERa2  ELa2 = a2 (ER  EL) = a2 [(2a)1/2  a1/2]EXAMPLE 1.11= a5/2()(2 1= 800 (0.1)5/22)2 11= 1.05 N m C(b) We can use Gausss law to find the total charge q inside the cube.We have  = q/0 or q = 0. Therefore,q = 1.05  8.854  1012 C = 9.27  1012 C.Example 1.12 An electric field is uniform, and in the positive xdirection for positive x, and uniform with the same magnitude but inthe negative x direction for negative x. It is given that E = 200 i N/Cfor x > 0 and E = 200 i N/C for x < 0. A right circular cylinder oflength 20 cm and radius 5 cm has its centre at the origin and its axisalong the x-axis so that one face is at x = +10 cm and the other is atx = 10 cm (Fig. 1.28). (a) What is the net outward flux through eachflat face? (b) What is the flux through the side of the cylinder?(c) What is the net outward flux through the cylinder? (d) What is thenet charge inside the cylinder?Solution(a) We can see from the figure that on the left face E and S areparallel. Therefore, the outward flux is = E.S =  200 ii SL36EXAMPLE 1.12= + 200 S, since ii S =  S= + 200   (0.05)2 = + 1.57 N m2 C1On the right face, E and S are parallel and thereforeR = E.S = + 1.57 N m2 C1.(b) For any point on the side of the cylinder E is perpendicular toS and hence E.S = 0. Therefore, the flux out of the side of thecylinder is zero.(c) Net outward flux through the cylinder = 1.57 + 1.57 + 0 = 3.14 N m2 C1FIGURE 1.28(d) The net charge within the cylinder can be found by using Gaussslaw which givesq = 0= 3.14  8.854  1012 C= 2.78  1011 CElectric Chargesand Fields1.15 APPLICATIONSOFGAUSSS LAWThe electric field due to a general charge distribution is, as seen above,given by Eq. (1.27). In practice, except for some special cases, thesummation (or integration) involved in this equation cannot be carriedout to give electric field at every point inspace. For some symmetric chargeconfigurations, however, it is possible toobtain the electric field in a simple way usingthe Gausss law. This is best understood bysome examples.1.15.1 Field due to an infinitelylong straight uniformlycharged wireConsider an infinitely long thin straight wirewith uniform linear charge density . The wireis obviously an axis of symmetry. Suppose wetake the radial vector from O to P and rotate itaround the wire. The points P, P, P soobtained are completely equivalent withrespect to the charged wire. This implies thatthe electric field must have the same magnitudeat these points. The direction of electric field atevery point must be radial (outward if  > 0,inward if  < 0). This is clear from Fig. 1.29.Consider a pair of line elements P1 and P2of the wire, as shown. The electric fieldsproduced by the two elements of the pair whensummed give a resultant electric field whichis radial (the components normal to the radialvector cancel). This is true for any such pairand hence the total field at any point P isradial. Finally, since the wire is infinite,electric field does not depend on the positionof P along the length of the wire. In short, theelectric field is everywhere radial in the planecutting the wire normally, and its magnitudedepends only on the radial distance r.To calculate the field, imagine a cylindricalGaussian surface, as shown in the Fig. 1.29(b).Since the field is everywhere radial, fluxthrough the two ends of the cylindricalGaussian surface is zero. At the cylindricalpart of the surface, E is normal to the surfaceat every point, and its magnitude is constant,since it depends only on r. The surface areaof the curved part is 2rl, where l is the lengthof the cylinder.FIGURE 1.29 (a) Electric field due to aninfinitely long thin straight wire is radial,(b) The Gaussian surface for a long thinwire of uniform linear charge density.37PhysicsFlux through the Gaussian surface=flux through the curved cylindrical part of the surface=E  2rlThe surface includes charge equal to  l. Gausss law then givesE  2rl = l/0i.e.,E =2 0rVectorially, E at any point is given byE=20rn(1.32)where n is the radial unit vector in the plane normal to the wire passingthrough the point. E is directed outward if  is positive and inward if  isnegative.Note that when we write a vector A as a scalar multiplied by a unitvector, i.e., as A = A a , the scalar A is an algebraic number. It can benegative or positive. The direction of A will be the same as that of the unitvector a if A > 0 and opposite to a if A < 0. When we want to restrict tonon-negative values, we use the symbol A and call it the modulus of A .Thus, A  0 .Also note that though only the charge enclosed by the surface (l )was included above, the electric field E is due to the charge on the entirewire. Further, the assumption that the wire is infinitely long is crucial.Without this assumption, we cannot take E to be normal to the curvedpart of the cylindrical Gaussian surface. However, Eq. (1.32) isapproximately true for electric field around the central portions of a longwire, where the end effects may be ignored.1.15.2 Field due to a uniformly charged infinite plane sheetLet  be the uniform surface charge density of an infinite plane sheet(Fig. 1.30). We take the x-axis normal to the given plane. By symmetry,the electric field will not depend on y and z coordinates and its directionat every point must be parallel to the x-direction.We can take the Gaussian surface to be arectangular parallelepiped of cross sectional areaA, as shown. (A cylindrical surface will also do.) Asseen from the figure, only the two faces 1 and 2 willcontribute to the flux; electric field lines are parallelto the other faces and they, therefore, do notcontribute to the total flux.The unit vector normal to surface 1 is in xdirection while the unit vector normal to surface 2is in the +x direction. Therefore, flux E.S throughboth the surfaces are equal and add up. ThereforeFIGURE 1.30 Gaussian surface for athe net flux through the Gaussian surface is 2 EA.uniformly charged infinite plane sheet.The charge enclosed by the closed surface is A.38Therefore by Gausss law,Electric Chargesand Fields2 EA = A/0or, E = /20Vectorically,E=n2 0(1.33)where n is a unit vector normal to the plane and going away from it.E is directed away from the plate if  is positive and toward the plateif  is negative. Note that the above application of the Gauss law hasbrought out an additional fact: E is independent of x also.For a finite large planar sheet, Eq. (1.33) is approximately true in themiddle regions of the planar sheet, away from the ends.1.15.3 Field due to a uniformly charged thin spherical shellLet  be the uniform surface charge density of a thin spherical shell ofradius R (Fig. 1.31). The situation has obvious spherical symmetry. Thefield at any point P, outside or inside, can depend only on r (the radialdistance from the centre of the shell to the point) and must be radial (i.e.,along the radius vector).(i) Field outside the shell: Consider a point P outside theshell with radius vector r. To calculate E at P, we take theGaussian surface to be a sphere of radius r and with centreO, passing through P. All points on this sphere are equivalentrelative to the given charged configuration. (That is what wemean by spherical symmetry.) The electric field at each pointof the Gaussian surface, therefore, has the same magnitudeE and is along the radius vector at each point. Thus, E andS at every point are parallel and the flux through eachelement is E S. Summing over all S, the flux through theGaussian surface is E  4  r 2. The charge enclosed is  4  R 2. By Gausss lawE  4  r2 =Or, E =4  R20q R2= 0 r 2 4  0 r 2where q = 4  R2  is the total charge on the spherical shell.Vectorially,E=q4  0 r 2r(1.34)FIGURE 1.31 Gaussiansurfaces for a point with(a) r > R, (b) r < R.The electric field is directed outward if q > 0 and inward ifq < 0. This, however, is exactly the field produced by a chargeq placed at the centre O. Thus for points outside the shell, the field dueto a uniformly charged shell is as if the entire charge of the shell isconcentrated at its centre.(ii) Field inside the shell: In Fig. 1.31(b), the point P is inside theshell. The Gaussian surface is again a sphere through P centred at O.39PhysicsThe flux through the Gaussian surface, calculated as before, isE  4  r 2. However, in this case, the Gaussian surface encloses nocharge. Gausss law then givesE  4  r2 = 0i.e., E = 0(r < R )(1.35)that is, the field due to a uniformly charged thin shell is zero at all pointsinside the shell*. This important result is a direct consequence of Gaussslaw which follows from Coulombs law. The experimental verification ofthis result confirms the 1/r2 dependence in Coulombs law.Example 1.13 An early model for an atom considered it to have apositively charged point nucleus of charge Ze, surrounded by auniform density of negative charge up to a radius R. The atom as awhole is neutral. For this model, what is the electric field at a distancer from the nucleus?FIGURE 1.32Solution The charge distribution for this model of the atom is asshown in Fig. 1.32. The total negative charge in the uniform sphericalcharge distribution of radius R must be Z e, since the atom (nucleusof charge Z e + negative charge) is neutral. This immediately gives usthe negative charge density , since we must have4 R3 = 0  Ze3EXAMPLE 1.13or  = 403 Ze4  R3To find the electric field E(r) at a point P which is a distance r awayfrom the nucleus, we use Gausss law. Because of the sphericalsymmetry of the charge distribution, the magnitude of the electricfield E(r) depends only on the radial distance, no matter what thedirection of r. Its direction is along (or opposite to) the radius vector rfrom the origin to the point P. The obvious Gaussian surface is aspherical surface centred at the nucleus. We consider two situations,namely, r < R and r > R.(i) r < R : The electric flux  enclosed by the spherical surface is = E (r )  4  r 2where E (r ) is the magnitude of the electric field at r. This is because* Compare this with a uniform mass shell discussed in Section 8.5 of Class XITextbook of Physics.Electric Chargesand Fieldsthe field at any point on the spherical Gaussian surface has thesame direction as the normal to the surface there, and has the samemagnitude at all points on the surface.The charge q enclosed by the Gaussian surface is the positive nuclearcharge and the negative charge within the sphere of radius r,i.e., q = Z e +4 r33Substituting for the charge density  obtained earlier, we haveq = ZeZer3R3Gausss law then gives,E (r ) =Z e 1r  ;4  0  r 2 R 3 r < REXAMPLE 1.13The electric field is directed radially outward.(ii) r > R: In this case, the total charge enclosed by the Gaussianspherical surface is zero since the atom is neutral. Thus, from Gaussslaw,E (r )  4  r 2 = 0 or E (r ) = 0; r > RAt r = R, both cases give the same result: E = 0.ON SYMMETRY OPERATIONSIn Physics, we often encounter systems with various symmetries. Consideration of thesesymmetries helps one arrive at results much faster than otherwise by a straightforwardcalculation. Consider, for example an infinite uniform sheet of charge (surface chargedensity ) along the y-z plane. This system is unchanged if (a) translated parallel to they-z plane in any direction, (b) rotated about the x-axis through any angle. As the systemis unchanged under such symmetry operation, so must its properties be. In particular,in this example, the electric field E must be unchanged.Translation symmetry along the y-axis shows that the electric field must be the sameat a point (0, y1, 0) as at (0, y2, 0). Similarly translational symmetry along the z-axisshows that the electric field at two point (0, 0, z1) and (0, 0, z2) must be the same. Byusing rotation symmetry around the x-axis, we can conclude that E must beperpendicular to the y-z plane, that is, it must be parallel to the x-direction.Try to think of a symmetry now which will tell you that the magnitude of the electricfield is a constant, independent of the x-coordinate. It thus turns out that the magnitudeof the electric field due to a uniformly charged infinite conducting sheet is the same at allpoints in space. The direction, however, is opposite of each other on either side of thesheet.Compare this with the effort needed to arrive at this result by a direct calculationusing Coulombs law.41PhysicsSUMMARY1.2.3.4.5.Electric and magnetic forces determine the properties of atoms,molecules and bulk matter.From simple experiments on frictional electricity, one can infer thatthere are two types of charges in nature; and that like charges repeland unlike charges attract. By convention, the charge on a glass rodrubbed with silk is positive; that on a plastic rod rubbed with fur isthen negative.Conductors allow movement of electric charge through them, insulatorsdo not. In metals, the mobile charges are electrons; in electrolytesboth positive and negative ions are mobile.Electric charge has three basic properties: quantisation, additivityand conservation.Quantisation of electric charge means that total charge (q) of a bodyis always an integral multiple of a basic quantum of charge (e) i.e.,q = n e, where n = 0, 1, 2, 3, .... Proton and electron have charges+e, e, respectively. For macroscopic charges for which n is a very largenumber, quantisation of charge can be ignored.Additivity of electric charges means that the total charge of a systemis the algebraic sum (i.e., the sum taking into account proper signs)of all individual charges in the system.Conservation of electric charges means that the total charge of anisolated system remains unchanged with time. This means that whenbodies are charged through friction, there is a transfer of electric chargefrom one body to another, but no creation or destruction of charge.Coulombs Law: The mutual electrostatic force between two pointcharges q1 and q2 is proportional to the product q1q2 and inverselyproportional to the square of the distance r 21 separating them.Mathematically,F21 = force on q2 due to q1 =k (q1q2 )r212r21where r21 is a unit vector in the direction from q1 to q2 and k =6.14  0is the constant of proportionality.In SI units, the unit of charge is coulomb. The experimental value ofthe constant 0 is0 = 8.854  1012 C2 N1 m2The approximate value of k isk = 9  109 N m2 C2The ratio of electric force and gravitational force between a protonand an electron isk e2 2.4  1039G m em p7.42Superposition Principle: The principle is based on the property that theforces with which two charges attract or repel each other are notaffected by the presence of a third (or more) additional charge(s). Foran assembly of charges q1, q2, q3, ..., the force on any charge, say q1, isElectric Chargesand Fieldsthe vector sum of the force on q1 due to q2, the force on q1 due to q3,and so on. For each pair, the force is given by the Coulombs law fortwo charges stated earlier.8. The electric field E at a point due to a charge configuration is theforce on a small positive test charge q placed at the point divided bythe magnitude of the charge. Electric field due to a point charge q hasa magnitude |q|/40r 2; it is radially outwards from q, if q is positive,and radially inwards if q is negative. Like Coulomb force, electric fieldalso satisfies superposition principle.9. An electric field line is a curve drawn in such a way that the tangentat each point on the curve gives the direction of electric field at thatpoint. The relative closeness of field lines indicates the relative strengthof electric field at different points; they crowd near each other in regionsof strong electric field and are far apart where the electric field isweak. In regions of constant electric field, the field lines are uniformlyspaced parallel straight lines.10. Some of the important properties of field lines are: (i) Field lines arecontinuous curves without any breaks. (ii) Two field lines cannot crosseach other. (iii) Electrostatic field lines start at positive charges andend at negative charges they cannot form closed loops.11. An electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite charges q and qseparated by some distance 2a. Its dipole moment vector p hasmagnitude 2qa and is in the direction of the dipole axis from q to q.12. Field of an electric dipole in its equatorial plane (i.e., the planeperpendicular to its axis and passing through its centre) at a distancer from the centre:E=p14  o (a 2 + r 2 )3 / 2p,4  o r 3for r >> aDipole electric field on the axis at a distance r from the centre:E =2 pr4  0 (r 2  a 2 )22p4  0r 3forr >> aThe 1/r 3 dependence of dipole electric fields should be noted in contrastto the 1/r 2 dependence of electric field due to a point charge.13. In a uniform electric field E, a dipole experiences a torque  given by =pEbut experiences no net force.14. The flux  of electric field E through a small area element S isgiven by = E.SThe vector area element S isS = S nwhere S is the magnitude of the area element and n is normal to thearea element, which can be considered planar for sufficiently small S.43PhysicsFor an area element of a closed surface, n is taken to be the directionof outward normal, by convention.15. Gausss law: The flux of electric field through any closed surface S is1/0 times the total charge enclosed by S. The law is especially usefulin determining electric field E, when the source distribution has simplesymmetry:(i) Thin infinitely long straight wire of uniform linear charge density E=2  0 rnwhere r is the perpendicular distance of the point from the wire andn is the radial unit vector in the plane normal to the wire passingthrough the point.(ii) Infinite thin plane sheet of uniform surface charge density E=2 0nwhere n is a unit vector normal to the plane, outward on either side.(iii) Thin spherical shell of uniform surface charge density E=qr4  0 r 2(r  R )E=0(r < R )where r is the distance of the point from the centre of the shell and Rthe radius of the shell. q is the total charge of the shell: q = 4R2.The electric field outside the shell is as though the total charge isconcentrated at the centre. The same result is true for a solid sphereof uniform volume charge density. The field is zero at all points insidethe shellPhysical quantityDimensionsUnitRemarksS[L2]m2S = S nElectric fieldE[MLT3A1]V m1Electric flux[ML3 T3A1]Vm = E.SDipole momentp[LTA]CmVector directedfrom negative topositive chargelinear[L1 TA]C m1surface[Lvolume[L3 TA]Vector area elementSymbolCharge density442TA]Cm2C m3Charge/lengthCharge/areaCharge/volumeElectric Chargesand FieldsPOINTS TO PONDER1.You might wonder why the protons, all carrying positive charges, arecompactly residing inside the nucleus. Why do they not fly away? Youwill learn that there is a third kind of a fundamental force, called thestrong force which holds them together. The range of distance wherethis force is effective is, however, very small ~10-14 m. This is preciselythe size of the nucleus. Also the electrons are not allowed to sit ontop of the protons, i.e. inside the nucleus, due to the laws of quantummechanics. This gives the atoms their structure as they exist in nature.2. Coulomb force and gravitational force follow the same inverse-squarelaw. But gravitational force has only one sign (always attractive), whileCoulomb force can be of both signs (attractive and repulsive), allowingpossibility of cancellation of electric forces. This is how gravity, despitebeing a much weaker force, can be a dominating and more pervasiveforce in nature.3. The constant of proportionality k in Coulombs law is a matter ofchoice if the unit of charge is to be defined using Coulombs law. In SIunits, however, what is defined is the unit of current (A) via its magneticeffect (Amperes law) and the unit of charge (coulomb) is simply definedby (1C = 1 A s). In this case, the value of k is no longer arbitrary; it isapproximately 9  109 N m2 C2.4. The rather large value of k, i.e., the large size of the unit of charge(1C) from the point of view of electric effects arises because (asmentioned in point 3 already) the unit of charge is defined in terms ofmagnetic forces (forces on currentcarrying wires) which are generallymuch weaker than the electric forces. Thus while 1 ampere is a unitof reasonable size for magnetic effects, 1 C = 1 A s, is too big a unit forelectric effects.5. The additive property of charge is not an obvious property. It is relatedto the fact that electric charge has no direction associated with it;charge is a scalar.6. Charge is not only a scalar (or invariant) under rotation; it is alsoinvariant for frames of reference in relative motion. This is not alwaystrue for every scalar. For example, kinetic energy is a scalar underrotation, but is not invariant for frames of reference in relativemotion.7. Conservation of total charge of an isolated system is a propertyindependent of the scalar nature of charge noted in point 6.Conservation refers to invariance in time in a given frame of reference.A quantity may be scalar but not conserved (like kinetic energy in aninelastic collision). On the other hand, one can have conserved vectorquantity (e.g., angular momentum of an isolated system).8. Quantisation of electric charge is a basic (unexplained) law of nature;interestingly, there is no analogous law on quantisation of mass.9. Superposition principle should not be regarded as obvious, or equatedwith the law of addition of vectors. It says two things: force on onecharge due to another charge is unaffected by the presence of othercharges, and there are no additional three-body, four-body, etc., forceswhich arise only when there are more than two charges.10. The electric field due to a discrete charge configuration is not definedat the locations of the discrete charges. For continuous volume chargedistribution, it is defined at any point in the distribution. For a surfacecharge distribution, electric field is discontinuous across the surface.45Physics11. The electric field due to a charge configuration with total charge zerois not zero; but for distances large compared to the size ofthe configuration, its field falls off faster than 1/r 2, typical of fielddue to a single charge. An electric dipole is the simplest example ofthis fact.EXERCISES1.11.21.31.41.51.61.71.81.91.101.11461.12What is the force between two small charged spheres havingcharges of 2  107C and 3  107C placed 30 cm apart in air?The electrostatic force on a small sphere of charge 0.4 C due toanother small sphere of charge  0.8 C in air is 0.2 N. (a) What isthe distance between the two spheres? (b) What is the force on thesecond sphere due to the first?Check that the ratio ke2/G memp is dimensionless. Look up a Tableof Physical Constants and determine the value of this ratio. Whatdoes the ratio signify?(a) Explain the meaning of the statement electric charge of a bodyis quantised.(b) Why can one ignore quantisation of electric charge when dealingwith macroscopic i.e., large scale charges?When a glass rod is rubbed with a silk cloth, charges appear onboth. A similar phenomenon is observed with many other pairs ofbodies. Explain how this observation is consistent with the law ofconservation of charge.Four point charges qA = 2 C, qB = 5 C, qC = 2 C, and qD = 5 C arelocated at the corners of a square ABCD of side 10 cm. What is theforce on a charge of 1 C placed at the centre of the square?(a) An electrostatic field line is a continuous curve. That is, a fieldline cannot have sudden breaks. Why not?(b) Explain why two field lines never cross each other at any point?Two point charges qA = 3 C and qB = 3 C are located 20 cm apartin vacuum.(a) What is the electric field at the midpoint O of the line AB joiningthe two charges?(b) If a negative test charge of magnitude 1.5  109 C is placed atthis point, what is the force experienced by the test charge?A system has two charges qA = 2.5  107 C and qB = 2.5  107 Clocated at points A: (0, 0, 15 cm) and B: (0,0, +15 cm), respectively.What are the total charge and electric dipole moment of the system?An electric dipole with dipole moment 4  109 C m is aligned at 30with the direction of a uniform electric field of magnitude 5  104 NC1.Calculate the magnitude of the torque acting on the dipole.A polythene piece rubbed with wool is found to have a negativecharge of 3  107 C.(a) Estimate the number of electrons transferred (from which towhich?)(b) Is there a transfer of mass from wool to polythene?(a) Two insulated charged copper spheres A and B have their centresseparated by a distance of 50 cm. What is the mutual force ofElectric Chargesand Fields1.131.14electrostatic repulsion if the charge on each is 6.5  107 C? Theradii of A and B are negligible compared to the distance ofseparation.(b) What is the force of repulsion if each sphere is charged doublethe above amount, and the distance between them is halved?Suppose the spheres A and B in Exercise 1.12 have identical sizes.A third sphere of the same size but uncharged is brought in contactwith the first, then brought in contact with the second, and finallyremoved from both. What is the new force of repulsion between Aand B?Figure 1.33 shows tracks of three charged particles in a uniformelectrostatic field. Give the signs of the three charges. Which particlehas the highest charge to mass ratio?FIGURE 1.331.151.161.171.18Consider a uniform electric field E = 3  103  N/C. (a) What is theflux of this field through a square of 10 cm on a side whose plane isparallel to the yz plane? (b) What is the flux through the samesquare if the normal to its plane makes a 60 angle with the x-axis?What is the net flux of the uniform electric field of Exercise 1.15through a cube of side 20 cm oriented so that its faces are parallelto the coordinate planes?Careful measurement of the electric field at the surface of a blackbox indicates that the net outward flux through the surface of thebox is 8.0  103 Nm2/C. (a) What is the net charge inside the box?(b) If the net outward flux through the surface of the box were zero,could you conclude that there were no charges inside the box? Whyor Why not?A point charge +10 C is a distance 5 cm directly above the centreof a square of side 10 cm, as shown in Fig. 1.34. What is themagnitude of the electric flux through the square? (Hint: Think ofthe square as one face of a cube with edge 10 cm.)FIGURE 1.3447Physics1.19A point charge of 2.0 C is at the centre of a cubic Gaussiansurface 9.0 cm on edge. What is the net electric flux through thesurface?1.20A point charge causes an electric flux of 1.0  103 Nm2/C to passthrough a spherical Gaussian surface of 10.0 cm radius centred onthe charge. (a) If the radius of the Gaussian surface were doubled,how much flux would pass through the surface? (b) What is thevalue of the point charge?1.21A conducting sphere of radius 10 cm has an unknown charge. Ifthe electric field 20 cm from the centre of the sphere is 1.5  103 N/Cand points radially inward, what is the net charge on the sphere?1.22A uniformly charged conducting sphere of 2.4 m diameter has asurface charge density of 80.0 C/m2. (a) Find the charge on thesphere. (b) What is the total electric flux leaving the surface of thesphere?1.23An infinite line charge produces a field of 9  104 N/C at a distanceof 2 cm. Calculate the linear charge density.1.24Two large, thin metal plates are parallel and close to each other. Ontheir inner faces, the plates have surface charge densities of oppositesigns and of magnitude 17.0  1022 C/m2. What is E: (a) in the outerregion of the first plate, (b) in the outer region of the second plate,and (c) between the plates?ADDITIONAL EXERCISES481.25An oil drop of 12 excess electrons is held stationary under a constantelectric field of 2.55  104 NC1 in Millikans oil drop experiment. Thedensity of the oil is 1.26 g cm3. Estimate the radius of the drop.(g = 9.81 m s2; e = 1.60  1019 C).1.26Which among the curves shown in Fig. 1.35 cannot possiblyrepresent electrostatic field lines?Electric Chargesand FieldsFIGURE 1.351.271.28In a certain region of space, electric field is along the z-directionthroughout. The magnitude of electric field is, however, not constantbut increases uniformly along the positive z-direction, at the rate of105 NC1 per metre. What are the force and torque experienced by asystem having a total dipole moment equal to 107 Cm in the negativez-direction ?(a) A conductor A with a cavity as shown in Fig. 1.36(a) is given acharge Q. Show that the entire charge must appear on the outersurface of the conductor. (b) Another conductor B with charge q isinserted into the cavity keeping B insulated from A. Show that thetotal charge on the outside surface of A is Q + q [Fig. 1.36(b)]. (c) Asensitive instrument is to be shielded from the strong electrostaticfields in its environment. Suggest a possible way.FIGURE 1.361.291.301.31A hollow charged conductor has a tiny hole cut into its surface.Show that the electric field in the hole is (/20) n , where n is theunit vector in the outward normal direction, and  is the surfacecharge density near the hole.Obtain the formula for the electric field due to a long thin wire ofuniform linear charge density  without using Gausss law. [Hint:Use Coulombs law directly and evaluate the necessary integral.]It is now believed that protons and neutrons (which constitute nucleiof ordinary matter) are themselves built out of more elementary unitscalled quarks. A proton and a neutron consist of three quarks each.Two types of quarks, the so called up quark (denoted by u) of charge+ (2/3) e, and the down quark (denoted by d) of charge (1/3) e,together with electrons build up ordinary matter. (Quarks of othertypes have also been found which give rise to different unusualvarieties of matter.) Suggest a possible quark composition of aproton and neutron.49Physics1.321.331.3450(a) Consider an arbitrary electrostatic field configuration. A smalltest charge is placed at a null point (i.e., where E = 0) of theconfiguration. Show that the equilibrium of the test charge isnecessarily unstable.(b) Verify this result for the simple configuration of two charges ofthe same magnitude and sign placed a certain distance apart.A particle of mass m and charge (q) enters the region between thetwo charged plates initially moving along x-axis with speed vx (likeparticle 1 in Fig. 1.33). The length of plate is L and an uniformelectric field E is maintained between the plates. Show that thevertical deflection of the particle at the far edge of the plate isqEL2/(2m vx2).Compare this motion with motion of a projectile in gravitational fielddiscussed in Section 4.10 of Class XI Textbook of Physics.Suppose that the particle in Exercise in 1.33 is an electron projectedwith velocity vx = 2.0  106 m s1. If E between the plates separatedby 0.5 cm is 9.1  102 N/C, where will the electron strike the upperplate? (|e|=1.6  1019 C, me = 9.1  1031 kg.)